---
author:
- 'Rafael Garcia-Meseguer'
bibliography: myBib.bib
csl: elsevier-without-titles.csl
pagetitle: Rafa's Chapter
---

# Transition State Theory

## 2.3. Solvent and Solute Coordinate Separation

There can be little argument that the fearsome complexity of organic chemistry has been successfully tamed by assuming a rough transferability of properties between similar systems. The classification of chemical reactions through the idea of the functional group, and the interpretations of infrared, ultraviolet and nuclear magnetic spectra have all benefitted enormously from this approximation. When one comes to consider reactions in solution, therefore, it seems natural to use a similar approach, and to assume that a reaction in one solvent is likely to be grossly similar to the same reaction in another solvent. This mindset leads easily to the notion that solute and solvent degrees of freedom are separable, with the former constituting a primary set, the latter a secondary set, and much of the focus becoming a proper description of the coupling between the two sets. 

Once the separation is made between solvent and solute degrees of freedom, there are different ways in which solvent can be represented – either, with an implicit model, an explicit model, or a mixture between both.[26] Implicit solvation models replace solvent molecules by an electrostatic field that is equivalent to the one produced by the solvent when polarized by the solute, and may also include nonelectrostatic terms to approximate specific effects such as hydrogen bonding.[3b,3c,27] However, by their nature, purely implicit solvent models cannot represent specific solute-solvent interactions at an atomistic level. In principle, this problem can be addressed by explicitimplicit hybrid treatments in which some solvent molecules, usually the first solvation shell around the solute, are included in full atomistic representation and then everything else is treated with an implicit solvation model.[25]

Finally, there are fully explicit solvation models, in which all solvent molecules are treated at a fully atomistic level. In these models, the separation of solvent and solute coordinates has a clear computational motivation. It is an approximation that can serve to make feasible a simulation that would otherwise be intractable, because of the large number of degrees of freedom that the explicit solvent molecules introduce to the model. Typically, one tries to model the reaction as a function of a single coordinate, which has to be a combination of the degrees of freedom of the system, usually an internal coordinate that is called the Reaction Coordinate (RC). The definition of this coordinate is very important because the RC should be normal (perpendicular in many dimensions) to the dividing surface at the TS and in order to improve the definition one could include any number of degrees of freedom of the solvent. For the reasons outlined earlier, the coordinates that define the RC are considered to be the primary degrees of freedom. Commonly, the secondary degrees of freedom in explicit solvent models are deemed to have an influence on the reaction that can be treated statistically, in some fashion. This approach is the one adopted by the Potential of Mean Force (PMF) [28] methodology to calculate the free energy profile of the reaction. The PMF is calculated from the probability density of finding the system in a given value of the RC, which is defined for the primary coordinates alone. It has consequently been argued that the PMF can consequently be viewed as a free energy function for the secondary degrees of freedom, but an ensembleaveraged potential energy profile for the primary ones.[13a]

Commonly, the primary coordinates involve only atoms of the solute, but it is possible to include some explicit solvent molecules, as we discuss further below. However, if one wants to retain the dynamical properties of the system only unbiased molecular dynamics (no umbrella sampling) can be used to sample the full space of coordinates.[29]

